ReproducibleResearch.md, before:

---
name: ReproducibleResearch
topic: Reproducible Research
maintainer: John Blischak, Alison Hill, Ben Marwick, Daniel Sjoberg
email: jdblischak@gmail.com
version: 2022-03-11
source: https://github.com/cran-task-views/ReproducibleResearch/
---


The goal of reproducible research is to tie specific instructions to
data analysis and experimental data so that scholarship can be
recreated, better understood and verified. Packages in R for this
purpose can be split into groups for: literate programming, pipeline
toolkits, package reproducibility, project workflows, code/data
formatting tools, format convertors, and object caching.

The current maintainers gratefully acknowledge
[Max Kuhn](https://github.com/topepo)
for originally creating and maintaining this task view.

If you would like to recommend a package to be included in this task view,
please e-mail the maintainer or submit an issue or pull request in the GitHub
repository linked above.


Literate Programming
====================

The primary way that R facilitates reproducible research is using a
document that is a combination of content and data analysis code. The
`Sweave` function (in the base R utils package) and the
`r pkg("knitr", priority = "core")` package can be used to
blend the subject matter and R code so that a single document defines
the content and the analysis. The `r pkg("brew")` and
`r pkg("R.rsp")` packages contain alternative approaches to
embedding R code into various markups.

The resources for literate programming are best organized by the
document type/markup language:

LaTeX
-----

Both `Sweave` and `r pkg("knitr")` can process LaTeX files.
`r pkg("lazyWeave")` can create LaTeX documents from
scratch.

The `r pkg("knitr")` and `r pkg("rmarkdown")`
packages (along with [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) ) can be used to
create slides using the LaTeX [beamer](https://ctan.org/pkg/beamer)
class.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *summary tables/statistics* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("Hmisc", priority = "core")`,
    `r pkg("NMOF")`, `r pkg("papeR")`,
    `r pkg("quantreg")`, `r pkg("rapport")`,
    `r pkg("reporttools")`, `r pkg("sparktex")`,
    `r pkg("tables")`,
    `r pkg("xtable", priority = "core")`,
    `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *tables/cross-tabulations* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("Hmisc")`,
    `r pkg("huxtable")`, `r pkg("lazyWeave")`,
    `r pkg("knitLatex")`, `r pkg("knitr")`,
    `r pkg("reporttools")`, `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *graphics* : `r pkg("animation")`,
    `r pkg("Hmisc")`, `grDevices:::pictex`,
    `r pkg("sparktex")`, `r pkg("tikzDevice")`
-   *statistical models/methods* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("memisc")`, `r pkg("quantreg")`,
    `r pkg("rms", priority = "core")`,
    `r pkg("stargazer")`, `r pkg("suRtex")`,
    `r pkg("texreg")`, `r pkg("xtable")`,
    `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *bibtex* : `r pkg("bibtex")` and
    `r pkg("RefManageR")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("latex2exp")` converts LaTeX equations
    to `             plotmath           ` expressions.

Miscellaneous Tools

-   `r pkg("Hmisc")` contains a function to correctly escape
    special characters. Standardized exams can be created using the
    `r pkg("exams")` package.

HTML
----

The `r pkg("knitr")` package can process HTML files
directly. `Sweave` can also work with HTML by way of the
`r pkg("R2HTML", priority = "core")` package.
`r pkg("lazyWeave")` can create HTML format documents from
scratch.

For HTML slides, a combination of the `r pkg("knitr")` and
`r pkg("rmarkdown")` packages (along with
[pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) ) can be used to create slides using
[ioslides](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/ioslides-presentation.html)
, [reveal.js](https://revealjs.com/) ,
[Slidy](https://www.w3.org/Talks/Tools/Slidy2/) , or
[remark.js](https://remark.js.org/) (from the
`r pkg("xaringan")` package).

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *summary tables/statistics* : `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("stargazer")`
-   *tables/cross-tabulations* : `r pkg("DT")`,
    `r pkg("flextable")`,
    `r pkg("formattable")`, `r pkg("gt")`,
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("htmlTable")`, `r pkg("HTMLUtils")`,
    `r pkg("huxtable")`, `r pkg("hwriter")`,
    `r pkg("knitr")`, `r pkg("lazyWeave")`,
    `r pkg("texreg")`, `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *statistical models/methods* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("rapport")`,
    `r pkg("stargazer")`, `r pkg("xtable")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("knitcitations")`,
    `r pkg("RefManageR")`

Miscellaneous Tools: `r pkg("htmltools")` has various tools
for working with HTML. `r pkg("tufterhandout")` can create
Tufte-style handouts.

Markdown
--------

The `r pkg("knitr")` package can process markdown files
without assistance. The packages `r pkg("markdown")` and
`r pkg("rmarkdown")` have general tools for working with
documents in this format. `r pkg("lazyWeave")` can create
markdown format documents from scratch. Also, the
`r pkg("ascii")` package can write R objects to the
[AsciiDoc](https://asciidoc.org/) format.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *summary tables/statistics* : `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("papeR")`
-   *tables/cross-tabulations* : `r pkg("DT")`,
    `r pkg("formattable")`,
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("htmlTable")`, `r pkg("knitr")`,
    `r pkg("lazyWeave")`, `r pkg("papeR")`
-   *statistical models/methods* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("pander")`,
    `r pkg("papeR")`, `r pkg("rapport")`,
    `r pkg("texreg")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("RefManageR")`

Miscellaneous Tools: `r pkg("tufterhandout")` can create
Tufte-style handouts. `r pkg("kfigr")` allows for figure
indexing in markdown documents.

Microsoft/LibreOffice Formats
-----------------------------

The `r pkg("officer")` (formerly ReporteRs and before that
R2DOCX) package can create `           docx         ` and
`           pptx         ` files. `r pkg("R2wd")` (windows
only) can also create Word documents from scratch and
`r pkg("R2PPT")` (also windows only) can create PowerPoint
slides. The `r pkg("rtf")` package does the same for Rich
Text Format documents. The `r pkg("openxlsx")` package
creates `           xlsx         ` files. The
`r pkg("readODS")` package can read and write Open Document
Spreadsheets.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *tables/cross-tabulations* : `r pkg("flextable")`,
    `r pkg("huxtable")`, `r pkg("pharmaRTF")`,
    `r pkg("r2rtf")`
-   *graphics* : `r pkg("mschart")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("unrtf")`

Pipeline Toolkits
=================

[Pipeline toolkits](https://github.com/pditommaso/awesome-pipeline) help
maintain and verify reproducibility. They synchronize computational
output with the underlying code and data, and they tell the user when
everything is up to date. In other words, they provide concrete evidence
that results are re-creatable from the starting materials, and the data
analysis project does not need to rerun from scratch. The
`r pkg("targets")` package is such a pipeline toolkit. It is
similar to [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/) , but it is
R-focused.

-   `r pkg("drake")`: A general-purpose computational engine
    for data analysis, drake rebuilds intermediate data objects when
    their dependencies change, and it skips work when the results are
    already up to date.
-   `r pkg("flowr")`: This framework allows you to design
    and implement complex pipelines, and deploy them on your
    institution's computing cluster.
-   `r pkg("makepipe")`: A suite of tools for transforming
    an existing workflow into a self-documenting pipeline with very
    minimal upfront costs.
-   `r pkg("repo")`: A data manager meant to avoid manual
    storage/retrieval of data to/from the file system.
-   `r pkg("targets")`: As a pipeline toolkit for Statistics
    and data science in R, the 'targets' package brings together
    function-oriented programming and 'Make'-like declarative
    workflows.

Package Reproducibility
=======================

R has various tools for ensuring that specific packages versions can be
required for analyses. As an example, the `r pkg("renv")`
package installs packages in project-specific directory, records
"snapshots" of the current package versions in a "lockfile", and
restores the package setup on a different machine.

-   `r pkg("checkpoint")`: Allows you to install packages as
    they existed on CRAN on a specific snapshot date as if you had a
    CRAN time machine.
-   `r pkg("groundhog")`: Make R scripts that rely on
    packages reproducible, by ensuring that every time a given script is
    run, the same version of the used packages are loaded.
-   `r pkg("liftr")`: Persistent reproducible reporting by
    containerization of R Markdown documents.
-   `r pkg("miniCRAN")`: Makes it possible to create an
    internally consistent repository consisting of selected packages
    from CRAN-like repositories.
-   `r pkg("packrat")`: Manage the R packages your project
    depends on in an isolated, portable, and reproducible way.
-   `r pkg("rbundler")`: Manages a project-specific library
    for dependency package installation.
-   `r pkg("renv")`: Create and manage project-local R
    libraries, save the state of these libraries to a 'lockfile', and
    later restore your library as required.
-   `r pkg("Require")`: A single key function, 'Require'
    that wraps 'install.packages', 'remotes::install\_github',
    'versions::install.versions', and 'base::require' that allows
    for reproducible workflows.
-   `r pkg("switchr")`: Provides an abstraction for
    managing, installing, and switching between sets of installed R
    packages.

Project Workflows
=================

Successfully completing a data analysis project often requires much more
than statistics and visualizations. Efficiently managing the code, data,
and results as the project matures helps reduce stress and errors. The
following "workflow" packages assist the R programmer by managing
project infrastructure and/or facilitating a reproducible workflow.

Workflow utility packages provide single-use functions to implement
project infrastructure or solve a specific problem. As a typical
example, `usethis::use_git()` initializes a Git repository, ignores
common R files, and commits all project files.

-   `r pkg("cabinets")`: Creates project specific directory
    and file templates that are written to a .Rprofile file.
-   `r pkg("here")`: Constructs paths to your project's
    files.
-   `r pkg("prodigenr")`: Create a project directory
    structure, along with typical files for that project.
-   `r pkg("RepoGenerator")`: Generates a project and repo
    for easy initialization of a GitHub repo for R workshops.
-   rrtools ( [GitHub only](https://github.com/benmarwick/rrtools) ):
    Instructions, templates, and functions for making a basic compendium
    suitable for doing reproducible research with R.
-   starters ( [GitHub only](https://github.com/lockedata/starters) ):
    Setting up R project directories for teaching, presenting, analysis,
    package development can be a pain. starters shortcuts this by
    creating folder structures and setting good defaults for you.
-   `r pkg("usethis")`: Automate package and project setup
    tasks that are otherwise performed manually.

Workflow framework packages provide an organized directory structure and
helper functions to assist during the development of the project. As a
typical example, `ProjectTemplate::create.project()` creates an
organized setup with many subdirectories, and
`ProjectTemplate::run.project()` executes each R script that is saved in
the `src/` subdirectory.

-   `r pkg("exreport")`: Analysis of experimental results
    and automatic report generation in both interactive HTML and LaTeX.
-   `r pkg("madrat")`: Provides a framework which should
    improve reproducibility and transparency in data processing. It
    provides functionality such as automatic meta data creation and
    management, rudimentary quality management, data caching, work-flow
    management and data aggregation.
-   `r pkg("makeProject")`: This package creates an empty
    framework of files and directories for the "Load, Clean, Func, Do"
    structure described by Josh Reich.
-   `r pkg("orderly")`: Order, create and store reports
    from R.
-   `r pkg("projects")`: Provides a project infrastructure
    with a focus on manuscript creation.
-   `r pkg("ProjectTemplate")`: Provides functions to
    automatically build a directory structure for a new R project. Using
    this structure, 'ProjectTemplate' automates data loading,
    preprocessing, library importing and unit testing.
-   `r pkg("reportfactory")`: Provides an infrastructure for
    handling multiple R Markdown reports, including automated curation
    and time-stamping of outputs, parameterisation and provision of
    helper functions to manage dependencies.
-   `r pkg("represtools")`: Reproducible research tools
    automates the creation of an analysis directory structure and work
    flow. There are R markdown skeletons which encapsulate typical
    analytic work flow steps. Functions will create appropriate modules
    which may pass data from one step to another.
-   `r pkg("tinyProject")`: Creates useful files and folders
    for data analysis projects and provides functions to manage data,
    scripts and output files.
-   `r pkg("worcs")`: Create reproducible and transparent
    research projects in 'R'. This package is based on the Workflow
    for Open Reproducible Code in Science (WORCS), a step-by-step
    procedure based on best practices for Open Science.
-   `r pkg("workflowr")`: Provides a workflow for your
    analysis projects by combining literate programming ('knitr' and
    'rmarkdown') and version control ('Git', via 'git2r') to
    generate a website containing time-stamped, versioned, and
    documented results.
-   `r pkg("zoon")`: Reproducible and remixable species
    distribution modelling.

Formatting Tools
================

`r pkg("formatR")` and `r pkg("styler")` can be
used to format R code.

`r pkg("highlight")` and `r pkg("highr")` can be
used to color R code.

Packages `r pkg("humanFormat")`,
`r pkg("lubridate")`, `r pkg("prettyunits")`,
and `r pkg("rprintf")` have functions to better format data.

Format Convertors
=================

`r pkg("pander")` can be used for rendering R objects into
[Pandoc's](http://pandoc.org/) markdown. `r pkg("knitr")`
has the function `           pandoc         ` that can call an installed
version of [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/) to convert documents between
formats such as Markdown, HTML, LaTeX, PDF and Word.
`r pkg("tth")` facilitates TeX to HTML/MathML conversions.

Object Caching Packages
=======================

When using `Sweave` and `r pkg("knitr")` it can be
advantageous to *cache* the results of time consuming code chunks if the
document will be re-processed (i.e. during debugging).
`r pkg("knitr")` facilitates object caching and the
Bioconductor package `r bioc("weaver")` can be used with
`Sweave`.

Non-literate programming packages to facilitating caching/archiving are
`r pkg("archivist")`, `r pkg("R.cache")`,
`r pkg("reproducible")`, `r pkg("storr")`, and
`r pkg("trackr")`.



### Links
-   [Sweave: Dynamic Generation of Statistical Reports Using Literate Data Analysis](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-57489-4_89)
-   [knitr: Elegant, flexible and fast dynamic report generation with R](http://yihui.name/knitr/)
-   [Wikipedia: Literate Programming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_Programming)
-   [Harrell: Reproducible Research (Biostatistics for Biomedical Research)](https://hbiostat.org/rr)
-   [Koenker, Zeileis: On Reproducible Econometric Research](http://www.econ.uiuc.edu/~roger/research/repro/)
-   [Peng: Reproducible Research and Biostatistics](https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxp014)
-   [Rossini, Leisch: Literate Statistical Practice](https://biostats.bepress.com/uwbiostat/paper194)
-   [Baggerly, Coombes: Deriving Chemosensitivity from Cell Lines: Forensic Bioinformatics and Reproducible Research in High-Throughput Biology](http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/09-AOAS291)
-   [Leisch: Sweave, Part I: Mixing R and LaTeX](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2002-3.pdf)
-   [Leisch: Sweave, Part II: Package Vignettes](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2003-2.pdf)
-   [Betebenner: Using Control Structures with Sweave](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2005-1.pdf)
-   [Garbade, Burgard: Using R/Sweave in Everyday Clinical Practice](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2006-2.pdf)
-   [Gorjanc: Using Sweave with LyX](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2008-1.pdf)
-   [Lecoutre: The R2HTML Package](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2003-3.pdf)
-   [List of pipeline toolkits](https://github.com/pditommaso/awesome-pipeline)
-   [Computational Environments and Reproducibility](https://github.com/o2r-project/ctv-computational-environments#readme)
-   [Bryan: Project-oriented workflow](https://www.tidyverse.org/articles/2017/12/workflow-vs-script/)
-   [rOpenSci: Reproducibility in Science](https://ropensci-archive.github.io/reproducibility-guide/)
-   [Temple Lang, Gentleman: Statistical Analyses and Reproducible Research](https://doi.org/10.1198/106186007X178663)
-   [Marwick, Boettiger, Mullen: Packaging Data Analytical Work Reproducibly Using R (and Friends)](https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375986)
-   [Xie: Write An R Package Using Literate Programming Techniques](https://yihui.org/rlp/)

Commit message:

Add blogdown, bookdown, and distill

ReproducibleResearch.md, after:

---
name: ReproducibleResearch
topic: Reproducible Research
maintainer: John Blischak, Alison Hill, Ben Marwick, Daniel Sjoberg
email: jdblischak@gmail.com
version: 2022-03-11
source: https://github.com/cran-task-views/ReproducibleResearch/
---


The goal of reproducible research is to tie specific instructions to
data analysis and experimental data so that scholarship can be
recreated, better understood and verified. Packages in R for this
purpose can be split into groups for: literate programming, pipeline
toolkits, package reproducibility, project workflows, code/data
formatting tools, format convertors, and object caching.

The current maintainers gratefully acknowledge
[Max Kuhn](https://github.com/topepo)
for originally creating and maintaining this task view.

If you would like to recommend a package to be included in this task view,
please e-mail the maintainer or submit an issue or pull request in the GitHub
repository linked above.


Literate Programming
====================

The primary way that R facilitates reproducible research is using a
document that is a combination of content and data analysis code. The
`Sweave` function (in the base R utils package) and the
`r pkg("knitr", priority = "core")` package can be used to
blend the subject matter and R code so that a single document defines
the content and the analysis. The `r pkg("brew")` and
`r pkg("R.rsp")` packages contain alternative approaches to
embedding R code into various markups.

The resources for literate programming are best organized by the
document type/markup language:

LaTeX
-----

Both `Sweave` and `r pkg("knitr")` can process LaTeX files.
`r pkg("lazyWeave")` can create LaTeX documents from
scratch.

The `r pkg("knitr")` and `r pkg("rmarkdown")`
packages (along with [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) ) can be used to
create slides using the LaTeX [beamer](https://ctan.org/pkg/beamer)
class.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *summary tables/statistics* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("Hmisc", priority = "core")`,
    `r pkg("NMOF")`, `r pkg("papeR")`,
    `r pkg("quantreg")`, `r pkg("rapport")`,
    `r pkg("reporttools")`, `r pkg("sparktex")`,
    `r pkg("tables")`,
    `r pkg("xtable", priority = "core")`,
    `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *tables/cross-tabulations* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("Hmisc")`,
    `r pkg("huxtable")`, `r pkg("lazyWeave")`,
    `r pkg("knitLatex")`, `r pkg("knitr")`,
    `r pkg("reporttools")`, `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *graphics* : `r pkg("animation")`,
    `r pkg("Hmisc")`, `grDevices:::pictex`,
    `r pkg("sparktex")`, `r pkg("tikzDevice")`
-   *statistical models/methods* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("memisc")`, `r pkg("quantreg")`,
    `r pkg("rms", priority = "core")`,
    `r pkg("stargazer")`, `r pkg("suRtex")`,
    `r pkg("texreg")`, `r pkg("xtable")`,
    `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *bibtex* : `r pkg("bibtex")` and
    `r pkg("RefManageR")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("latex2exp")` converts LaTeX equations
    to `             plotmath           ` expressions.

Miscellaneous Tools

-   `r pkg("Hmisc")` contains a function to correctly escape
    special characters. Standardized exams can be created using the
    `r pkg("exams")` package.

HTML
----

The `r pkg("knitr")` package can process HTML files
directly. `Sweave` can also work with HTML by way of the
`r pkg("R2HTML", priority = "core")` package.
`r pkg("lazyWeave")` can create HTML format documents from
scratch.

For HTML slides, a combination of the `r pkg("knitr")` and
`r pkg("rmarkdown")` packages (along with
[pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) ) can be used to create slides using
[ioslides](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/ioslides-presentation.html)
, [reveal.js](https://revealjs.com/) ,
[Slidy](https://www.w3.org/Talks/Tools/Slidy2/) , or
[remark.js](https://remark.js.org/) (from the
`r pkg("xaringan")` package).

The packages `r pkg("blogdown")`, `r pkg("bookdown")`, and `r pkg("distill")`
can create entire websites.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *summary tables/statistics* : `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("stargazer")`
-   *tables/cross-tabulations* : `r pkg("DT")`,
    `r pkg("flextable")`,
    `r pkg("formattable")`, `r pkg("gt")`,
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("htmlTable")`, `r pkg("HTMLUtils")`,
    `r pkg("huxtable")`, `r pkg("hwriter")`,
    `r pkg("knitr")`, `r pkg("lazyWeave")`,
    `r pkg("texreg")`, `r pkg("ztable")`
-   *statistical models/methods* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("rapport")`,
    `r pkg("stargazer")`, `r pkg("xtable")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("knitcitations")`,
    `r pkg("RefManageR")`

Miscellaneous Tools: `r pkg("htmltools")` has various tools
for working with HTML. `r pkg("tufterhandout")` can create
Tufte-style handouts.

Markdown
--------

The `r pkg("knitr")` package can process markdown files
without assistance. The packages `r pkg("markdown")` and
`r pkg("rmarkdown")` have general tools for working with
documents in this format. `r pkg("lazyWeave")` can create
markdown format documents from scratch. Also, the
`r pkg("ascii")` package can write R objects to the
[AsciiDoc](https://asciidoc.org/) format.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *summary tables/statistics* : `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("papeR")`
-   *tables/cross-tabulations* : `r pkg("DT")`,
    `r pkg("formattable")`,
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`,
    `r pkg("htmlTable")`, `r pkg("knitr")`,
    `r pkg("lazyWeave")`, `r pkg("papeR")`
-   *statistical models/methods* :
    `r pkg("gtsummary")`, `r pkg("pander")`,
    `r pkg("papeR")`, `r pkg("rapport")`,
    `r pkg("texreg")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("RefManageR")`

Miscellaneous Tools: `r pkg("tufterhandout")` can create
Tufte-style handouts. `r pkg("kfigr")` allows for figure
indexing in markdown documents.

Microsoft/LibreOffice Formats
-----------------------------

The `r pkg("officer")` (formerly ReporteRs and before that
R2DOCX) package can create `           docx         ` and
`           pptx         ` files. `r pkg("R2wd")` (windows
only) can also create Word documents from scratch and
`r pkg("R2PPT")` (also windows only) can create PowerPoint
slides. The `r pkg("rtf")` package does the same for Rich
Text Format documents. The `r pkg("openxlsx")` package
creates `           xlsx         ` files. The
`r pkg("readODS")` package can read and write Open Document
Spreadsheets.

Object Conversion Functions:

-   *tables/cross-tabulations* : `r pkg("flextable")`,
    `r pkg("huxtable")`, `r pkg("pharmaRTF")`,
    `r pkg("r2rtf")`
-   *graphics* : `r pkg("mschart")`
-   *others* : `r pkg("unrtf")`

Pipeline Toolkits
=================

[Pipeline toolkits](https://github.com/pditommaso/awesome-pipeline) help
maintain and verify reproducibility. They synchronize computational
output with the underlying code and data, and they tell the user when
everything is up to date. In other words, they provide concrete evidence
that results are re-creatable from the starting materials, and the data
analysis project does not need to rerun from scratch. The
`r pkg("targets")` package is such a pipeline toolkit. It is
similar to [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/) , but it is
R-focused.

-   `r pkg("drake")`: A general-purpose computational engine
    for data analysis, drake rebuilds intermediate data objects when
    their dependencies change, and it skips work when the results are
    already up to date.
-   `r pkg("flowr")`: This framework allows you to design
    and implement complex pipelines, and deploy them on your
    institution's computing cluster.
-   `r pkg("makepipe")`: A suite of tools for transforming
    an existing workflow into a self-documenting pipeline with very
    minimal upfront costs.
-   `r pkg("repo")`: A data manager meant to avoid manual
    storage/retrieval of data to/from the file system.
-   `r pkg("targets")`: As a pipeline toolkit for Statistics
    and data science in R, the 'targets' package brings together
    function-oriented programming and 'Make'-like declarative
    workflows.

Package Reproducibility
=======================

R has various tools for ensuring that specific packages versions can be
required for analyses. As an example, the `r pkg("renv")`
package installs packages in project-specific directory, records
"snapshots" of the current package versions in a "lockfile", and
restores the package setup on a different machine.

-   `r pkg("checkpoint")`: Allows you to install packages as
    they existed on CRAN on a specific snapshot date as if you had a
    CRAN time machine.
-   `r pkg("groundhog")`: Make R scripts that rely on
    packages reproducible, by ensuring that every time a given script is
    run, the same version of the used packages are loaded.
-   `r pkg("liftr")`: Persistent reproducible reporting by
    containerization of R Markdown documents.
-   `r pkg("miniCRAN")`: Makes it possible to create an
    internally consistent repository consisting of selected packages
    from CRAN-like repositories.
-   `r pkg("packrat")`: Manage the R packages your project
    depends on in an isolated, portable, and reproducible way.
-   `r pkg("rbundler")`: Manages a project-specific library
    for dependency package installation.
-   `r pkg("renv")`: Create and manage project-local R
    libraries, save the state of these libraries to a 'lockfile', and
    later restore your library as required.
-   `r pkg("Require")`: A single key function, 'Require'
    that wraps 'install.packages', 'remotes::install\_github',
    'versions::install.versions', and 'base::require' that allows
    for reproducible workflows.
-   `r pkg("switchr")`: Provides an abstraction for
    managing, installing, and switching between sets of installed R
    packages.

Project Workflows
=================

Successfully completing a data analysis project often requires much more
than statistics and visualizations. Efficiently managing the code, data,
and results as the project matures helps reduce stress and errors. The
following "workflow" packages assist the R programmer by managing
project infrastructure and/or facilitating a reproducible workflow.

Workflow utility packages provide single-use functions to implement
project infrastructure or solve a specific problem. As a typical
example, `usethis::use_git()` initializes a Git repository, ignores
common R files, and commits all project files.

-   `r pkg("cabinets")`: Creates project specific directory
    and file templates that are written to a .Rprofile file.
-   `r pkg("here")`: Constructs paths to your project's
    files.
-   `r pkg("prodigenr")`: Create a project directory
    structure, along with typical files for that project.
-   `r pkg("RepoGenerator")`: Generates a project and repo
    for easy initialization of a GitHub repo for R workshops.
-   rrtools ( [GitHub only](https://github.com/benmarwick/rrtools) ):
    Instructions, templates, and functions for making a basic compendium
    suitable for doing reproducible research with R.
-   starters ( [GitHub only](https://github.com/lockedata/starters) ):
    Setting up R project directories for teaching, presenting, analysis,
    package development can be a pain. starters shortcuts this by
    creating folder structures and setting good defaults for you.
-   `r pkg("usethis")`: Automate package and project setup
    tasks that are otherwise performed manually.

Workflow framework packages provide an organized directory structure and
helper functions to assist during the development of the project. As a
typical example, `ProjectTemplate::create.project()` creates an
organized setup with many subdirectories, and
`ProjectTemplate::run.project()` executes each R script that is saved in
the `src/` subdirectory.

-   `r pkg("exreport")`: Analysis of experimental results
    and automatic report generation in both interactive HTML and LaTeX.
-   `r pkg("madrat")`: Provides a framework which should
    improve reproducibility and transparency in data processing. It
    provides functionality such as automatic meta data creation and
    management, rudimentary quality management, data caching, work-flow
    management and data aggregation.
-   `r pkg("makeProject")`: This package creates an empty
    framework of files and directories for the "Load, Clean, Func, Do"
    structure described by Josh Reich.
-   `r pkg("orderly")`: Order, create and store reports
    from R.
-   `r pkg("projects")`: Provides a project infrastructure
    with a focus on manuscript creation.
-   `r pkg("ProjectTemplate")`: Provides functions to
    automatically build a directory structure for a new R project. Using
    this structure, 'ProjectTemplate' automates data loading,
    preprocessing, library importing and unit testing.
-   `r pkg("reportfactory")`: Provides an infrastructure for
    handling multiple R Markdown reports, including automated curation
    and time-stamping of outputs, parameterisation and provision of
    helper functions to manage dependencies.
-   `r pkg("represtools")`: Reproducible research tools
    automates the creation of an analysis directory structure and work
    flow. There are R markdown skeletons which encapsulate typical
    analytic work flow steps. Functions will create appropriate modules
    which may pass data from one step to another.
-   `r pkg("tinyProject")`: Creates useful files and folders
    for data analysis projects and provides functions to manage data,
    scripts and output files.
-   `r pkg("worcs")`: Create reproducible and transparent
    research projects in 'R'. This package is based on the Workflow
    for Open Reproducible Code in Science (WORCS), a step-by-step
    procedure based on best practices for Open Science.
-   `r pkg("workflowr")`: Provides a workflow for your
    analysis projects by combining literate programming ('knitr' and
    'rmarkdown') and version control ('Git', via 'git2r') to
    generate a website containing time-stamped, versioned, and
    documented results.
-   `r pkg("zoon")`: Reproducible and remixable species
    distribution modelling.

Formatting Tools
================

`r pkg("formatR")` and `r pkg("styler")` can be
used to format R code.

`r pkg("highlight")` and `r pkg("highr")` can be
used to color R code.

Packages `r pkg("humanFormat")`,
`r pkg("lubridate")`, `r pkg("prettyunits")`,
and `r pkg("rprintf")` have functions to better format data.

Format Convertors
=================

`r pkg("pander")` can be used for rendering R objects into
[Pandoc's](http://pandoc.org/) markdown. `r pkg("knitr")`
has the function `           pandoc         ` that can call an installed
version of [Pandoc](http://pandoc.org/) to convert documents between
formats such as Markdown, HTML, LaTeX, PDF and Word.
`r pkg("tth")` facilitates TeX to HTML/MathML conversions.

Object Caching Packages
=======================

When using `Sweave` and `r pkg("knitr")` it can be
advantageous to *cache* the results of time consuming code chunks if the
document will be re-processed (i.e. during debugging).
`r pkg("knitr")` facilitates object caching and the
Bioconductor package `r bioc("weaver")` can be used with
`Sweave`.

Non-literate programming packages to facilitating caching/archiving are
`r pkg("archivist")`, `r pkg("R.cache")`,
`r pkg("reproducible")`, `r pkg("storr")`, and
`r pkg("trackr")`.



### Links
-   [Sweave: Dynamic Generation of Statistical Reports Using Literate Data Analysis](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-57489-4_89)
-   [knitr: Elegant, flexible and fast dynamic report generation with R](http://yihui.name/knitr/)
-   [Wikipedia: Literate Programming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_Programming)
-   [Harrell: Reproducible Research (Biostatistics for Biomedical Research)](https://hbiostat.org/rr)
-   [Koenker, Zeileis: On Reproducible Econometric Research](http://www.econ.uiuc.edu/~roger/research/repro/)
-   [Peng: Reproducible Research and Biostatistics](https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxp014)
-   [Rossini, Leisch: Literate Statistical Practice](https://biostats.bepress.com/uwbiostat/paper194)
-   [Baggerly, Coombes: Deriving Chemosensitivity from Cell Lines: Forensic Bioinformatics and Reproducible Research in High-Throughput Biology](http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/09-AOAS291)
-   [Leisch: Sweave, Part I: Mixing R and LaTeX](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2002-3.pdf)
-   [Leisch: Sweave, Part II: Package Vignettes](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2003-2.pdf)
-   [Betebenner: Using Control Structures with Sweave](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2005-1.pdf)
-   [Garbade, Burgard: Using R/Sweave in Everyday Clinical Practice](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2006-2.pdf)
-   [Gorjanc: Using Sweave with LyX](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2008-1.pdf)
-   [Lecoutre: The R2HTML Package](https://www.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/Rnews_2003-3.pdf)
-   [List of pipeline toolkits](https://github.com/pditommaso/awesome-pipeline)
-   [Computational Environments and Reproducibility](https://github.com/o2r-project/ctv-computational-environments#readme)
-   [Bryan: Project-oriented workflow](https://www.tidyverse.org/articles/2017/12/workflow-vs-script/)
-   [rOpenSci: Reproducibility in Science](https://ropensci-archive.github.io/reproducibility-guide/)
-   [Temple Lang, Gentleman: Statistical Analyses and Reproducible Research](https://doi.org/10.1198/106186007X178663)
-   [Marwick, Boettiger, Mullen: Packaging Data Analytical Work Reproducibly Using R (and Friends)](https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375986)
-   [Xie: Write An R Package Using Literate Programming Techniques](https://yihui.org/rlp/)
